This 2020 convention is being broadcast in 240 lands.
We anticipate over 14 million individuals will be able to enjoy this program by this means.
Your generous donations make this possible.
Donations can be made online at donate.jw.org.
You may be seated.
No doubt you enjoy examining Jehovah's creations.
What can creation teach us about Jehovah and about finding joy?
How can we apply what we learn?
Take note of the lessons in the upcoming six-part symposium.
Each speaker will introduce the one to follow.
Brother Joel Dellinger, a helper to the service committee will deliver the first talk entitled
Creation proves that Jehovah wants us to rejoice, exquisite flowers.
Are you convinced that Jehovah wants you to rejoice?
We have many reasons to believe that.
Creation is one such proof.
In the beginning, the Bible teaches that Jehovah worked very hard to make our home a delightful place to live here on Planet Earth.
This included his creating millions of different species of plants and animals.
And when he finished with all this amazing activity, do you know what our creator did next?
At the end of the sixth creative day, the Bible tells us at Genesis 1 and verse 31,
God saw everything he had made, and look, it was very good.
Think about that.
After working hard over perhaps the course of thousands of years, our Father paused.
He inspected everything, and then he rejoiced in all that he had made.
Brothers and sisters, the beauty and wisdom in creation proves that our Heavenly Father wants us to enjoy life on Planet Earth.
In fact, he wants us to join him in rejoicing over all that he has made.
But how can we do that?
The Bible gives us a clue at Psalm 111 and verse 2.
I invite you, please, to open your Bible and read along with all of us, Psalm 111, verse 2.
It says,
The works of Jehovah are great.
They are studied by all those finding pleasure in them.
We see clearly in the Bible that Jehovah invites us to look closely at the things he has made so that we can learn from them,
and doing so is a delightful experience.
So let's do that together.
In this symposium, we will examine six of Jehovah's many works and our God-given ability to enjoy them all.
First, we'll focus our attention on exquisite flowers.
Then our next speaker will talk about one of our favorite things, delicious food.
Next, we will discuss beautiful colors, our well-designed bodies, delightful sounds, and lastly fascinating animals.
Each talk in this series will also teach us scriptural lessons from creation that can help us rejoice in life even now in these difficult last days.
Well, are you as ready as I am?
Let's start by looking closely at exquisite flowers.
In the following video, I invite you to look for the answers to these three questions.
First, how many species of flowering plants are there?
Second, what practical needs do flowers serve?
And third, how can flowers help us when we get anxious?
Please enjoy the video.
The Earth has more than 350,000 species of flowering plants.
Flowers serve practical needs.
Flowers make pollen in order to reproduce and nectar for creatures that spread pollen.
Pollination produces nutritious seeds, fruits and vegetables.
Beautiful flower we see may look like this to a bee.
Some flowers reflect ultraviolet light in ways that create a hard-to-miss target.
We enjoy more than the flowers' beauty and aroma.
Yet some plants do not need beautiful flowers to reproduce.
Flowers, pollen, nectar, and aromas are costly for plants to produce.
Those resources could be used for other purposes.
Yet plants make flowers in breathtaking abundance.
Jehovah generously created flowers in a way that brings us joy
and reminds us to trust him when we are anxious.
Take a lesson from the lilies of the field.
How they grow, they do not toil nor do they spin.
But not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
Did that video stir within you a desire to get to know Jehovah's creative works even better?
Jehovah designed us to enjoy the beauty of flowers and their lovely fragrances.
Can you imagine trying to study all 350,000 species of flowering plants?
Admiring their beauty, smelling them, and maybe even making a drawing or taking a photo of each one?
You know, if you started today and spent a little time every day getting to know a different flower,
your study project would take a little over 958 years.
It's a good thing we're going to live forever, isn't it?
But in addition to seeing the beauty in flowers,
as we've learned in the video, flowers play an important role in our ecosystem.
Flowers make pollen in order to reproduce and nectar for creatures like the bees that spread pollen.
In turn, pollination produces nutritious seeds, fruits, and vegetables.
Thanks to the flowers, we have food to eat.
And how we marvel at the ingenious design that's evident in all things in creation.
Many people today enjoy looking at creation, but few realize that when they do so,
they're actually getting a glimpse into the mind and heart of our loving creator, Jehovah.
Well, that's not true of us, though, is it?
Because we know who Jehovah is.
When we carefully observe all the things he has made,
we naturally think of him, our drawn closer to him, and to his beautiful qualities.
At one point in life, the faithful man, Job, was reminded by his friend Elihu to stop
and consider carefully the wonderful works of God.
Do you recall how that advice helped Job?
As Job learned, our joy increases when we're focused on Jehovah and on his works instead of on ourselves.
Parents and young ones, this is a good lesson for all of us.
Following the advice given to Job can also draw us closer to Jehovah.
How much better that is than spending time with much of the world's entertainment that is debased?
Such pre-packaged entertainment is often designed to turn us away from Jehovah, not draw us closer to him.
But what about spending time observing Jehovah's works?
Now that's a wholesome pastime with a future.
Observing flowers may also bring to our mind another lesson, one that Jesus taught.
Please open your Bible again to Matthew 6 and we'll read together verses 28 to 30.
In the reading, look for the answer to the following question.
How can flowers help us when we get anxious?
Let's read Matthew 6 verses 28 to 30.
Jesus said,
Also, why are you anxious about clothing?
Take a lesson from the lilies of the field how they grow.
They do not toil, nor do they spin.
But I tell you that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
Now if this is how God closed the vegetation of the field that is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven,
will he not much rather clothe you with little faith?
How heartwarming.
Have you ever been anxious about food and clothing?
If so, you're not alone.
Among those listening to Jesus on this occasion were many poor people who had the same natural concerns.
But Jesus encouraged them, how so, by reminding them to take a lesson from the flowers.
Jesus knew what we know.
Jehovah generously created flowers in a way that brings us joy and reminds us to trust him when we are anxious.
When we see how well Jehovah takes care of all the flowers,
we're reminded of how generous he is and his loving care of humans.
And like Jehovah, when we give generously to others and help care for their needs when it's within the power of our hand to do so,
we too will experience the joy that comes from giving.
Dear ones, may we never forget that it was Jehovah who gave us the ability to appreciate exquisite flowers.
May doing just that bring you joy and add to your praise of Jehovah forever.
Now, Brother Ralph Walls, who serves as a helper to the personnel committee, will present the next talk of this symposium.
Creation proves that Jehovah wants us to rejoice, delicious food, rice and beans.
You can eat them with just about anything and they will be delicious.
What about kimchi?
It's a dish of fermented vegetables with a variety of seasonings, producing a complex taste of sour and spicy.
And Jehovah's rice? So flavor-some.
This is cooked in an appetizing tomato and pepper puree, laced with chili for a zesty taste.
And at the end of a day of hard work, how about a piece of sweet, fruity, cool watermelon?
It's wonderfully refreshing.
All over planet earth, there are a vast variety of nutritious, delicious and refreshing foods.
That is what God has provided.
It is just as the Bible says.
Please read along with me at Ecclesiastes chapter 3, verses 12 and 13.
I have concluded that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and to do good during their life.
Also that everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work.
It is the gift of God.
No doubt you enjoy your favorite foods.
Your mouth may be watering just from thinking about it.
As much as we enjoy eating individually, when we share a good meal with family and friends, it's a special time.
In the following video, note how Jehovah's provision of food gives evidence that he wants us to enjoy life.
Our tongue can detect five basic tastes.
There is sweet, salty, sour, bitter.
And the rich savoury taste called umami.
But we enjoy not just five flavors, but possibly over a hundred thousand.
How?
As we chew, we also smell our food.
Chewing releases aromas that pass up into our nose through the back of our throat.
Taste and smell then combine to make the flavors we enjoy.
Our taste buds develop before we're born.
As an unborn baby swallows amniotic fluid, it may taste what its mother eats.
And it's more likely to enjoy the same food she does.
We don't eat just to survive.
We love to eat.
It makes us happy and the Bible says why?
That everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work.
It is the gift of God.
We are made so that we must take in physical food regularly in order to survive.
Yet how grateful we are that our Creator has made eating so enjoyable.
That reflects the way of Jehovah.
Filling our needs creates joy, not dread.
You will not find a normal individual complaining about eating a good dinner.
No, rather it's enjoyable.
Now, turn with me, please, to Matthew 4.
And notice another vital need we have that relates to food.
Matthew 4.4
It says,
it is written,
man must live not on bread alone,
but on every word that comes from Jehovah's mouth.
We need physical food to stay alive and we enjoy doing so.
But the same is true with spiritual food.
We need it to stay alive spiritually.
Also, just as is true with physical food,
when we partake of spiritual food, we find true joy.
Isn't that what Jesus said in his introduction to the sermon on the Mount?
Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need?
The beauty of Jehovah's way is that he has made the satisfying of our spiritual need enjoyable.
Why do we say that?
Because God's word, the Bible, is written in a way that is appealing to us.
In his great wisdom, he used humans to write the Bible. Think about it.
If, for example, he had used angels,
would they have been able to convey the emotions and feelings with a human touch?
Words convey not just information,
but emotions such as fear, sorrow, and disappointment.
By allowing imperfect men to choose the wording for the ideas they received through Holy Spirit,
God conveyed his message with warmth, variety, and the appeal of human emotions and feelings.
That makes his word appealing to us humans.
In addition to that, Jehovah provides a variety of spiritual food in abundance.
But taking in spiritual food requires effort just as it takes in preparing and eating a delicious meal.
Rice and beans, kimchi, and jolaf rice each take time and effort to prepare.
It takes effort to plant, cultivate, and pick watermelon.
But what a joy it is to experience the results of such efforts.
What can we do to make the study of God's word more enjoyable?
When reading the Bible, do so allowed in a lively manner.
But when we do that, we experience what Psalm 1 verse 2 says.
His delight is in the law of Jehovah, and he reads his law in an undertone day and night.
Take time to do research and to meditate.
By being creative, you can make personal study and family study meaningful and satisfying.
When reading the Bible, imagine the sounds, the sights, the smells,
and the appearance of the events.
The August 15, 2011 watchtower said,
it is not the intention of the governing body to establish one format for all families.
Since circumstances vary, it is appropriate for each family head or individual
to evaluate how this weekly occasion can be used in the best way.
In other words, make family and personal worship an enjoyable time.
It may not always be necessary or even desirable to use a question and answer method.
A relaxed atmosphere is more conducive to a lively and stimulating discussion.
It promotes creative thinking.
We marvel at Jehovah's love and wisdom.
Not only has he given us life and the means to sustain it,
but he has also given us the ability to find pleasure in doing so.
Due to human rulership, many today do not receive adequate amounts of physical food.
But the day is near when our loving creator will see to it that everyone alive
will have an abundance of food and drink.
In the meantime, may all of us deserve Jehovah's love for us
and enjoy the food and drink that we do have and the abundance of spiritual food.
With such perfect gifts, we look forward to enjoying life forever.
Brother Harold Corker, a helper to the publishing committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Creation proves that Jehovah wants us to rejoice.
Beautiful colors.
One of the most precious gifts we enjoy as humans is the gift of sight.
Sight is possible because of the way our eyes and our brain work together.
The complexity of our eyes and their connectivity with our brain
gives strong evidence of a very wise designer.
And that designer is clearly identified for us in the Bible.
Please open your Bibles to the Book of Psalms and we're going to look at Psalm 94 verse 9.
It reads this way,
The one who made the ear, can he not hear?
The one who formed the eye, can he not see?
So Jehovah created the eye and our ability to see and we're very grateful for that.
But he didn't make it just though that we see in one color
just so that we can move around and work and function safely and efficiently.
He gave us the ability to see a wide variety of colors that enrich our lives.
We very much appreciate the brilliant colors of butterflies, birds, fishes and flowers.
What is your favorite color?
Is it red, blue, green?
Or you may say you've only given me three choices.
That's true.
How many color possibilities are there that we can see?
And how do our eyes and our brain work together to produce this variety of colors?
And what role does light play in this process?
These questions will be answered in the following video
and please take note how all of this wonderful design by Jehovah reassures us
that our Creator wants us to rejoice.
What is color?
It's how we perceive wavelengths of light.
Objects that reflect all the wavelengths of visible light appear white.
When an object reflects only some wavelengths, we see color.
Cells in our eye detect light and send signals to our brain.
We have three kinds of color sensing cells.
Those that detect red, green and blue.
How do we perceive other colors?
Mixing red, green and blue light changes the color we see.
This flower is yellow because it reflects red and green light into our eye.
With just three kinds of color receptors, we can distinguish some 10 million colors.
Color triggers our emotions.
Blue and green can calm us.
Red and orange can excite.
In the Bible, descriptions that include color help us learn.
Is there any doubt that God gave us the gift of color for our joy?
I put my rainbow in the cloud and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and the earth.
How grateful we are that Jehovah gave us this ability to see a variety of colors.
And color has an impact on our emotions.
For example, the color red.
It's a very high visible color and it's filled with energy.
Sometimes it's associated with danger.
And red it said can actually make us breathe faster and even raise our blood pressure.
But on the other hand, green is a very calming color.
It's very tranquil.
And that's why when we look at a beautiful green garden or beautiful hillside,
why we feel very relaxed.
Besides affecting our emotions,
Jehovah has used color in the scriptures to teach us Bible truths
and to help us remember them, to illustrate.
What do you think of when I mentioned the following?
A white horse, a red horse, a black horse, a pale horse.
Well right away your minds went to the book of Revelation, didn't they?
And you understand what these four horses picture.
The white horse pictures Jesus Christ as the enthroned king riding in righteous warfare.
The red horse picturing the bloody warfare among the nations in these last days.
The black horse, Stark famine and the pale horse, we're quite familiar with these days, aren't we?
Pale horse pictures dreaded disease at pandemics leading to death.
So we see how Jehovah used color to teach us Bible truths and to help us remember them.
There's another way that Jehovah has used scriptures and color to teach us about him.
An example of this is an Ezekiel chapter 1 verses 26 through 28,
where Jehovah gives Ezekiel a beautiful, brilliant view of his throne.
And among all this glory, there is a beautiful rainbow.
And what does a rainbow picture?
The rainbow denotes peacefulness, calmness, tranquility, indicating what?
That with all of his dynamic energy, Jehovah is a calm, peaceful God.
And that's very reassuring to us and we are endeared to him.
Now, earlier, we talked about the association of light with color.
And in the scriptures, Jehovah uses light to depict something about how he increases our understanding of Bible truths.
At Proverbs 418, the Bible says,
But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light that grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.
Now, this applies spiritually, but we can understand it literally, can't we?
If you're taking an early morning walk in a countryside and the sun has not come up yet, you can see things,
but you're not quite sure what you see.
It props you don't even know what color they are.
But when the sun comes up, well, you see clearly what you were looking at.
A beautiful white fence, a green pasture, and a big, stately red barn in the distance.
And now your appreciation for your walk has been enhanced.
Well, likewise, the Bible tells us at Sec. Corinthians 4.6
Let the light shine out of darkness, and he has shown on our hearts to illuminate them with the glorious knowledge of God.
Jehovah provides his servants with spiritual lightenment, and that helps us to understand and deeply appreciate Bible truths even more.
And as a result, we understand them, we're motivated to apply them, and it draws us closer to our Heavenly Father.
Well, how thankful we are that Jehovah created us with the ability to see color.
It enriches our lives, touches our emotions, helps us to learn and remember Bible truths, helps us to understand our Heavenly Father better,
and the light that He provides gives us a progressive improvement in our Bible understanding.
How thankful we are for the gift that Jehovah has given us to see color.
It is a strong evidence that He really wants us to enjoy life to the full.
And now, let's give our attention to Brother Robert Lucioni, who will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Creation proves that Jehovah wants us to rejoice our well-designed bodies.
Our previous parts have reminded us that Jehovah's creation of flowers and food and colors all demonstrate that Jehovah wants us to be happy, to be joyful.
Well, in this part, we're going to see that Jehovah designed our bodies in a way that shows that He wants us to be happy as well.
Now, Jehovah designed us with the amazing capacity for motion.
A humans can walk, we can run, we can swim, we can dance.
In fact, if you turn in your Bibles to Acts chapter 17 and verse 28, you will see that this is a God-given ability.
Acts chapter 17, verse 28,
For by Him we have life and move and exist.
This word here move refers to the ability from Jehovah for us to be active.
But with that in mind, we have two questions.
One is, are there lessons that we can learn from how Jehovah designed us that can help us to rejoice?
And number two, are there lessons that we can learn that can help us in our worship of Jehovah?
Well, let's consider those two points.
But first, let's watch the following video that will help us appreciate the marvelous way in which we were designed.
Our bodies are designed to move.
The way we move can be complex or precise.
It could require strength or stamina.
Walking involves the coordination of dozens of muscles.
Muscles are controlled by our brain and nervous system.
They support and move our bones.
And are powered by the food we eat and the oxygen we breathe.
Everybody part is a marvel of engineering.
The knee is designed to withstand repeated impact.
Surrounding tissue cushions and aligns it.
Finding suggests that regular movement helps prevent joint damage.
The body is a machine that strengthens as we use it.
Movement helps us to stay healthy and feel good.
The body is a credit to its creator.
For by him, we have life and move and exist.
The makeup of the human body proves that Jehovah wants us not just to exist, but to be happy.
But do you remember our first question?
What lessons can we learn?
Well, there's two of them.
One, as the video highlighted, Jehovah designed our bodies to move.
Did you note the comment?
The movement helps us stay healthy and feel good.
Research has established that leading a physically active life can help us to think clearly, to feel happier.
Have more energy. Be more productive.
What an incredible gift from Jehovah.
He created us to move.
And also, he created us in a way that the more we move, the more we exercise, we work, we do things for others, the happier we are.
And the second point is that Jehovah designed our bodies with many different parts, but to work as one unit.
Did you notice the coordination needed just to walk?
Something we take for granted.
And what about our knee?
Can you imagine if our knee did not work in harmony with the rest of the body?
What if every time we stood up, we weren't sure which way it would bend?
How complicated that would be.
But no, Jehovah created our bodies to work as one complete unit.
And did you notice also the video stated that our body is like a machine with many different moving parts, but it all works together.
But a unique difference between a machine and our body is that our body strengthens as we use it.
Now, you think about that. If you go out and you buy a car, you buy a bicycle, you may think that's a successful purchase.
If it operates as intended, but you would never expect that car or bicycle to improve and go stronger every time you use it.
But that's what happens to our body.
And that allows us to exercise, walk, run, swim, dance, even more.
And the more we move, the happier we are.
What an incredible design.
How we appreciate our bodies is wonderful gift from Jehovah.
But remember our second question.
Are there lessons that we can learn from the body that can help us to be happy in our worship of Jehovah?
Well, let's consider those same two points again.
Remember we said that Jehovah designed our bodies to move.
So what should we do?
Well, let's look together to 1 Corinthians chapter 15 and verse 58.
1 Corinthians 15, 58.
It says, therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast and movable always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.
So what do we need to do?
Move, stay busy, have plenty to do in the work of the Lord.
And Jehovah gave us further reason for rejoicing by giving us meaningful work to do.
Now, many of you dear brothers and sisters have said that you've never felt busier than you do now.
Do you think that's a coincidence?
Do you think it's a coincidence that the darker and more depressing these last days have become
that you are busier than ever in Jehovah's work?
No!
See, that is one of the ways that Jehovah uses to help us to be happy and healthy in these last days.
Now, we know that our primary work is that of preaching the good news of the kingdom.
And we do that through the house to house preaching work, we do that through public witnessing, through Bible studies.
But even when this work is restricted due to world events, we still find ways to preach.
And when we have plenty to do in the work of the Lord, in the preaching work, we're happy and we're better able to put our troubles into perspective.
Now, others of you support the kingdom work by serving at Bethel or by constructing and renovating theocratic facilities,
others of you sharing relief work, but whatever you do, it brings joy and it brings glory to Jehovah.
So here's a question.
Are you staying as busy as you can in your circumstances allow in Jehovah's work?
Continue to have plenty to do in the work of the Lord.
You'll be happy and you'll never regret it.
But now, our second point, we also establish a Jehovah designed our body with many parts, but to work as one unit.
Well, what lesson do we learn from that?
We'll look over to Ephesians chapter 4 and verse 16.
Ephesians chapter 4 and verse 16.
And it says, from him, all the body is harmoniously joined together and made to cooperate through every joint that gives what is needed.
When each respective member functions properly, this contributes to the growth of the body as it builds itself up in love.
So what do we learn from this?
Stay united, cooperate together, function properly.
We learn that every part of the human body is necessary and it must work together.
Well, similarly, the congregation is made up of many different members.
Each member, each of you, whether young or old, strong or frail, all of you contribute to the whole and the beauty of the congregation.
Each one of you is needed.
You are special to Jehovah and your brothers and sisters.
And did you see when the congregation is harmoniously joined together, what happens?
The congregation is built up.
Now, again, many of you have said that you've never felt closer to each other or Jehovah's organization than you do now.
Again, that's no coincidence.
As the end draws near, Jehovah's gathering us closer and closer together in unity and those bonds among us need to grow even stronger.
So how much we appreciate and how much we can learn from the wonderful way in which we are made.
May each of us, and remember those two points, be determined to be as active as possible move in Jehovah's service,
and two, may each of us do all that we can to promote unity.
And if you do, you will be happy.
And not only will you bring joy to yourself, but you will bring joy to others as well.
But now, Brother Gaius Glockentine, a helper to the publishing committee will now present the next talk of this symposium,
Creation proves that Jehovah wants us to rejoice, delightful sounds.
Our well-designed body is indeed a reason for us to rejoice.
Certain body parts help us to perceive the world around us.
For example, please turn with me to Proverbs 20 verse 12.
Let us see what the Scriptures say in connection with two sensory organs.
Here in Proverbs 20 verse 12 we read,
The hearing ear and the seeing eye, Jehovah has made both of them.
Yes, our ability to hear and see is from Jehovah.
How grateful we are that he has given us the senses.
They allow us to enjoy life more fully.
The hear, for example, allows us to hear delightful sounds.
How does it make you feel when you hear birds chirping or the relaxing sound of a babbling brook?
And how we cherish hearing the voice of a loved one.
Maybe you're made, your father or mother, or your child.
We also enjoy beautiful music.
Even those who cannot hear can enjoy music,
some connect with the song's bass notes or its beat rather than its melody.
In the following video, note how Jehovah created us to enjoy a wide variety of sounds.
Our world is full of sounds. Some are natural.
Others we create.
We can hear music before we're born.
And can develop a love of music as we grow.
We can compose music.
Be moved by it.
And replay it in our minds.
Musical instruments typically combine a sound generator which produces tones
with a resonator such as wood or metal which adds volume.
The design resembles our own vocal organs.
But few instruments compare to the beauty of the human voice.
Our hearing complements the voice.
We can listen to things that draw us closer to God
and use the voice He gave us to praise Him with joy.
Praise Ja. For Jehovah is good.
Sing praises to His name. For it is pleasant.
Yes, sounds definitely enrich our life.
They make our life more enjoyable.
Does this not instill in us the desire to praise Jehovah?
Now let us please open to Isaiah chapter 30 verse 21.
Here we see that ears and hearing are sometimes used in the figurative way in the Bible.
Isaiah 30 verse 21 reads,
and your own ears will hear word behind you saying,
this is the way. Walk in it.
In case you should go to the right or in case you should go to the left.
We can hear Jehovah's figurative voice from His word the Bible
and from His guidance through the Holy Spirit and the congregation.
Jehovah's guidance is so clear it is as if we could hear Him speaking to us.
Let me ask you a question.
Does the sound of Jehovah's voice make you enjoy life?
Does it make you rejoice?
I suppose we would all answer with a clear yes.
Jehovah's voice is a delightful sound.
We all know how good it feels when we apply Jehovah's guidance
and enjoy success in life.
Let's think again about our literal ears.
They are very sensitive so we need to protect them.
Certain sounds, noise can even damage them.
So to protect our hearing you might use acoustic earmarks to block out harmful noise.
By what about our figurative ears?
Do we need to protect them too?
Are there sounds out there that can harm us?
Yes, there are.
The reality is we live in a world full of damaging and unpleasant noise.
So then how can we protect ourselves?
Here are three measures we need to take.
First, block out the harmful noise around us.
We can put on noise cancelling headphones.
In other words, we refuse to listen to anything that can distance us from Jehovah.
Like what?
Deceptive reasoning and false accusations, for example, are very dangerous.
They undermine our trust in Jehovah's organization.
Some who were once part of the Christian congregation now attempt to mislead us.
They spread half truths and outright lies about Jehovah's organization.
Harmful sounds might also come from non-Christian workmates, schoolmates, or contacts on social media.
They do not share our beliefs.
So conversations with them are rarely faith strengthening.
They might weaken our faith, making our Christian life course more difficult.
Therefore, we need to protect our ears from damaging noise by not listening to it.
What is the second way to protect ourselves from damaging sounds?
Headphones can help us block out the noise around us and replace it with something delightful.
Maybe a favorite song.
So put on our figurative headphones and listen to hold some things.
Our favorite sounds.
Delightful sounds from Jehovah.
This is what we hear at our Christian meetings.
And when we sing at our Christian meetings like we've seen in the video, our sounds praise Jehovah.
What we read in our publications.
What we see in our website.
What we hear in our building conversations with our brothers and sisters.
All of these beautiful sounds protect our ears.
A third aid for protecting our ears is Jehovah's help.
Sometimes we might not feel like putting on our headphones.
We might argue it is so much more comfortable without them.
The damage to my ears will not be that serious.
Now this is where Jehovah comes into play.
He will help us listen to his voice whenever we ask him for his help in prayer.
He will motivate us to put on our headphones so to speak.
He gives us the inner strength to stop listening to sounds that might be tempting and yet are so dangerous.
So what are the three ways to protect our figurative ears.
We stop listening to damaging sounds.
We listen to hold some things.
And we pray for Jehovah's help.
Dear brothers and sisters, Jehovah created sounds because he wants us to enjoy life.
Please let us continue to make wise use of our hearing.
And then we will rejoice in hearing delightful sounds forever.
Brother John Akron, helper to the coordinators committee, will now present the last talk of this symposium.
Creation proves that Jehovah wants us to rejoice.
Fascinating animals.
What's your favorite animal?
My favorite animal is the dolphin.
One time I was snorkeling in the ocean and a pot of dolphins came by.
And of course with the mask on I could see underwater.
And it was beautiful to watch how they could swim, how sleek they were in the water.
Then I watched as one of them used his powerful tail to shoot up to the surface of the water.
I lifted my head up and watched him jump out of the water and gracefully go right back in.
It was a sight I won't forget.
I'm sure that if we talk to each of you watching this, you could tell some really good story about your favorite animal.
Our beautiful planet earth is full of animals.
Of course though, for many of us in modern day life, we don't get a chance to interact with animals that much.
Most of our interaction with animals is second hand through books or videos.
In fact, the internet is full of videos, especially of cats.
People share these videos why?
Because it makes them smile. They enjoy watching them.
In fact, many of you are probably thinking of some video you just watched about animals.
Clearly, Jehovah created animals with qualities to bring us joy, to make us happy.
Watching them in person or in videos can cultivate our interest.
They can entertain us and make us feel good.
We see Jehovah sense of humor and how the animals interact and play with one another.
And we can also learn lessons from the animals.
Proverbs chapter 6 and verse 6 is an example of that.
Proverbs chapter 6 and verse 6.
Go to the ant, you lazy one.
Observe its ways and become wise.
Now I can remember as a young boy, I was fascinated with ants.
So many of them, and yet they all knew what to do.
And they could carry these really big leaves and other things for their size.
It was amazing to see what they could do, even the building of their tunnels.
As children, many of us were interested in animals, fascinated with them.
However, as we got older, we became more fascinated with technology, or things that man has made.
But really, the things that man has made cannot compare to the things Jehovah has made, especially the animals.
The design and wonder, you feel when you watch your favorite animal is in a category all by itself.
Now in the following video, we're going to see some really beautiful animals.
Maybe you will see your favorite animal.
Animals fascinate us.
We marvel at their speed, their agility, and their strength.
Their beauty and behavior are a pleasure to watch.
Like us, they play.
Some even dance.
They are industrious.
A beaver dam can extend hundreds of meters.
Some can even be seen from space.
When we observe animals, we learn more about the creator.
Their instinctive wisdom reveals his wisdom.
He is caring and generous.
And he is a happy God.
Animals fascinate us because we are made in God's image.
We enjoy what he enjoys.
Especially our earth and its amazing animals.
They are his gift to us.
Let us make man in our image according to our likeness.
And let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth.
Were you and the others with you watching that video smiling?
Or maybe even laughing a little bit when you saw the little dog jumping back and forth?
You see the design of animals to bring us joy is not an evolutionary accident.
Jehovah and Jesus, his master worker, found joy in creating and designing animal life to delight us.
Now, can you imagine Jehovah and Jesus discussing designing an elephant?
The elephant trunk is a nose, it's an arm, it's a shower head, it's a straw, and can even be a snorkel.
Did you know that their feet are so well padded that you can hardly hear them coming?
Imagine, Jehovah and Jesus making this huge elephant and saying, we're going to make it really quiet.
Or can you imagine what the angels thought when they first saw a lemur dancing?
Or a hummingbird hovering in the air?
Or a little puppy chasing its tail?
Or can you imagine being Adam?
The first human being amongst all of these animals.
How Adam must have thrilled to watch the animals and name them?
What would you have called an animal with a funny hump on its back?
Or a bird that could mimic the sounds you made?
Or a lizard that could change colors?
Maybe even looking at it as it moved, changing colors, wondering how did it do that?
Jehovah assigned Adam to not only name the animals but to care for them.
Let's read the scripture that was highlighted in our video in Genesis 1 and verse 26.
Genesis 1 and verse 26.
Since then God said, let us make man in our image according to our likeness
and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals
and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth.
Yes, Jehovah God wanted Adam and his descendants, that's us, to take care of the animals and to take the light in them.
If we take time to enjoy animal life, we can make some very fascinating discoveries.
Did you see in the video the lemurs of Madagascar?
Do you know how many varieties of lemurs there are?
Do you know what lemurs eat?
Have you ever seen lemurs play?
I have and I guarantee you you will enjoy it and smile when you do.
I made one discovery about dolphins.
Dolphins can blow underwater a perfect circle of air
and then they like to play with it afterwards.
First time I saw that video, I couldn't hardly believe my eyes.
Friends, today we can only imagine what it will be like in the future paradise
when we can really enjoy animal life the way Jehovah truly intended.
In review, this symposium has been about Jehovah's creative works, exquisite flowers, delicious food,
beautiful colors, our well-designed bodies, delightful sounds and fascinating animals,
all of which convinces us that Jehovah wants us to enjoy life.
At a time when many people are not finding meaning or joy in the things that man has made,
observe and rejoice in the gift of the things that Jehovah has made and given to us.
Make them a source of true joy in your life.
Thank you brothers for sharing those thought-provoking lessons from creation.
Our Christian brothers and sisters also bring us great joy.
How can we safeguard and strengthen our relationships with them?
Brother Stephen led of the governing body will direct us to the Bible's Wise Council.
His theme is, those who promote peace have joy.
Why?
Ravens brought Elijah bread and meat morning and evening.
Jesus transformed a hundred gallons of water into a very fine wine.
A hundred and twenty Christians suddenly could speak different languages.
What do those three events have in common?
They were all three miracles produced by Holy Spirit.
But miracles are no longer happening today, is that right?
Not really if you think about it.
If we think about it, the peace, the love, the harmony of Jehovah's people in a world that is so divided
is a modern-day miracle.
In contrast, Satan's world around us is becoming more divided by race, ethnicity, religion, political affiliation, and so forth.
But Jehovah's people, more united than ever.
And when we attend our assemblies and conventions, we especially see this.
We see different races and nationalities enjoying a genuinely peaceful, joyful gathering.
In fact, looking at a world map, sister let an iron able to calculate that during the past twenty years,
we've attended assemblies, conventions, large gatherings, and at least 82 different countries.
And every one of them overflowed with love and joy.
And every one of them convinced us even more that these are Jehovah's people.
People he's gathered from all nations, tribes, peoples, and tongues into his organization and is preparing for the new world.
But now we ask, what makes this modern-day miracle possible?
The answer, it stems from a peaceful relationship that we have with our father, Jehovah, who is called in 1 Thessalonians 523, the God of Peace.
As his children, we strive to imitate him.
And we're all brothers and sisters, we have the same father, so we are ones who show peace and love like our father.
But here's another question, is maintaining this peace in harmony automatic?
Well, is maintaining a garden, an automobile, our health automatic?
No, it takes effort, doesn't it? We're all imperfect, so we have to work at maintaining peace every day.
That's the thought if you go to 1 Peter 3, please. It does take effort.
1 Peter 3, verse 10,
For whoever would love life and see good days must guard his tongue from bad and his lips from speaking deception,
let him turn away from what is bad and do what is good.
Now notice, let him seek peace and pursue it.
So notice, effort to turn from bad, do good, seek peace and pursue it. Two action verbs.
If you want to illustrate that, think of a policeman seeking pursuing a criminal.
The criminal is trying to get away, isn't he? Well, peace tries to get away from us because of imperfection, but we have to pursue it.
Interestingly, the Bible links peace to happiness.
Proverbs 12-20, the theme scripture for this talk says,
Those who promote peace have joy. Matthew 5-9.
Happy are the peacemakers, since they will be called sons of God.
Now it didn't say happy are the peaceful.
See, that's just tranquil, passive. Even a dead body is peaceful.
No happy are the peacemakers.
A peacemaker actively promotes peace.
He makes peace where it previously was lacking.
If you think about cows, they make milk.
Bees make honey. A cheese maker makes cheese.
A peacemaker makes peace.
Maybe it's been lost, it's been disturbed.
But he has skill in restoring it.
And of course, a peacemaker avoids doing anything that would disturb the peace in the first place.
He works very hard to create an environment where peace can prevail.
But now that leads us into the discussion about how peacemakers avoid the two peace destroyers,
jealousy and contentiousness.
Now these two peace disturbers are identified at James chapter 3.
Let's go there, please. James chapter 3.
And let's read together verses 14 and 15.
But if you have bitter jealousy and contentiousness in your hearts,
do not be bragging and lying against the truth.
This is not the wisdom that comes down from above.
It is earthly, animalistic, demonic.
You know, his first jealousy is identified.
What is jealousy?
It means to resent someone because of his possessions, talents, or position.
Rather than be happy for him, we resent him.
Maybe even dislike him for what he has.
Usually things that we don't have.
But what makes this very serious is that jealousy can escalate to being envy.
Now, what is envy? And what's the difference between envy and jealousy?
One biblical reference works as this.
Jealousy refers to the desire to be as well off as another.
But envy refers to the desire to deprive another of what he has.
So the envious person, not only begrudges what someone has,
he actually wants to take it away from him.
That second peace destroyer, contentiousness.
What does that mean?
Being disagreeable, argumentative, competitive, terrible quality.
It's the product of pride and selfish ambition.
And as we read earlier, in James 3, 14, and 15,
it's certainly not part of that wisdom that comes down from above,
but rather it is earthly, characteristic of earthly humans who are alienated from God.
It is animalistic, characteristic of animals who lack spirituality
and are often contentious with each other.
It is even demonic.
Characteristic of the wicked spirits who are very proud and ambitious.
But genuine peacemakers work very hard to avoid these two peace disturbers,
jealousy and contentiousness.
They neither flop their talents nor do they feel threatened
if others are more skilled preachers, teachers, organizers or shepherds.
They're very happy to be considered a lesser one,
as Jesus encouraged at Luke 9.48.
Now it's true, a peacemaker made his our certain privileges of service,
but he is not consumed with ambition.
See, he's balanced in his approach.
As it says at 1 Timothy 3-1,
if a man is reaching out to be an overseer,
he is deserous of a fine work.
But it didn't say he should ambitiously grab to be an overseer.
See, he's balanced.
We could illustrate this by reaching out for a nice tasty piece of fruit on a tree
and then think of a small boy very aggressively grabbing for a toy,
perhaps to try to take it away from another boy.
There's a real difference, isn't there?
But now how does a peacemaker reach out to qualify for privileges of service?
Well, he just works hard to develop Christian qualities within himself,
and he just works hard in behalf of King Dimitris,
and he's guided by Galatians 6 verse 4,
where it says he will have cause for rejoicing in regard to himself alone
and not in comparison with the other person.
Additionally, a real peacemaker humbly waits on Jehovah
to determine when he's qualified to receive a certain privilege.
And Jehovah knows, doesn't he?
I love the account about Moses, how when he was 40 years old,
he really thought he was qualified ready to lead the Israelites out of Egypt.
But Jehovah knew he wasn't ready yet,
but now after tending flocks for 40 years and mid-end when he was now 80 years old,
Jehovah knew now he was ready.
Interestingly, at this point, Moses thought he wasn't ready,
but Jehovah assured him that he was.
And when a peacemaker does receive a privilege of service,
he credits receiving it to Jehovah,
and not as a personal achievement.
So to conclude this portion of our talk about avoiding these peace disturbance,
we say, may we all strive to be genuine peacemakers,
analyzing ourselves, praying for Jehovah's spirit,
to help us to avoid any tendency,
to be jealous, to envy, or to be contentious with our brothers.
But now, let's talk about some things we can do personally,
to promote peace and joy.
In fact, let's talk quickly about six things we can do.
Number one, cultivate humility and modesty.
Humility means to consider others superior to ourselves.
Modesty means to be aware of our own limitations.
Now, if we have those two closely related qualities,
we'll be able to apply Romans chapter 12, verse 3,
which says we should not think more of ourselves than it is necessary to think,
but to think so as to have a sound mind.
And here's the second thing we can do to promote joy and peace.
Appreciate and value the good qualities and talents of others.
Focus on their good points, not their flaws.
And how thankful we can be that Jehovah does that with us.
Otherwise, we'd be doomed, wouldn't we?
But maybe you heard the illustration of a brother,
holding up a white piece of paper with a red spot in the middle
and asking an audience what they see.
Well, most say they see a red spot.
But then he points out that actually 99% of what they're looking at is white paper.
But we tend to notice the spot.
Well, if we're not careful, that's what we can do with our brothers.
No set flaw, rather than all the good qualities.
But may all of us cultivate the Jehovah-like quality of noticing,
appreciating and valuing the good qualities of our brothers.
Now here's the third thing we can do.
Never presume that fellow Christians are trying to outdo us.
Verse Corinthians 137 says,
So we believe, we hope,
that our brothers are doing what they're doing out of a good motive
to please Jehovah, not to outdo us.
And we remember Jehovah's appointed only one judge, Jesus.
We are no judge, we have no right to negatively judge our brothers' motives.
Now here's the fourth thing we can do.
Strive to always rejoice over our brothers' privileges and successes.
Romans 12, 15.
Rejoice with those who rejoice.
Weep with those who weep.
Now which is easier?
Well generally it's not so hard to weep with someone who's had some tragedy.
But now what if some really good things happen to them and it hasn't happened to us?
I'm so happy.
I just got appointed as a regular pioneer.
Now we were really hoping to get into the pioneer work ourselves,
but we haven't been able to do it.
Are we going to really be happy from our heart with our brother?
Well if we love our brother and we love Jehovah,
then we're going to work really hard to have that right attitude from our heart.
See, we will smash any hint of jealousy.
We'll smash it with love.
Now here's a fifth thing we can do.
Faithfully support those who serve in responsible positions,
such as the elders, and obviously doing that.
Supporting these ones or taking the lead definitely promotes peace and joy in the congregation.
Here's one more thing.
Center your life on serving Jehovah and helping others,
rather than focusing on ourselves.
Maybe our feelings,
our perceived reputation,
if we focus on serving Jehovah
and helping our brothers,
will truly be peace promoters in the congregation.
By doing those six things,
we'll prove that we're peacemakers,
peace promoters who are reflecting the wisdom from above.
Now that's the thought again, let's go back to James chapter three,
that wisdom from above.
Now that's what we want to reflect.
James chapter three,
and let's take a look this time at verse number 13.
Who is wise in understanding among you?
Let him by his fine conduct demonstrate works performed
with a mildness that comes from wisdom,
and then drop down to verse 17.
But the wisdom from above is first of all pure,
then, now notice,
peaceable,
it didn't say peaceful,
passive,
peaceable,
that means a peacemaker.
Reasonable, ready to obey,
full of mercy and good fruits,
impartial, not hypocritical.
Moreover,
the fruit of righteousness is sewn in peaceful conditions
for those who are making peace.
Yes, we're encouraged to be a peacemaker,
and when we do this,
we bring joy to ourselves.
We impart joy to others,
and most importantly,
we make Jehovah rejoice.
But now think about this,
once a peacemaker,
doesn't mean always a peacemaker.
We have to keep working at this quality.
Now this will be well illustrated
in the following video interview.
I got married in 2002.
Around that time,
I was appointed a ministerial servant,
and my wife and I were serving as regular pioneers.
In 2004,
we were given the opportunity to serve as special pioneers.
It was something that we really wanted,
because we wanted to do more for Jehovah.
So when we got that assignment,
we were delighted.
The brothers in the congregation were also very happy for us.
But everything did not go smoothly.
As time went on,
I faced some difficult situations.
The fact that I was not appointed as an elder
made me feel disappointed.
In one congregation,
two brothers who had served as ministerial servants
for a shorter time than I had,
were appointed as elders.
I felt that those brothers did not have
as much experience as I had.
I thought,
I am the one with the experience,
so why didn't I get appointed?
I started to question my own qualifications,
and this made me very sad.
After the two brothers were appointed,
I started to dislike them.
I was also angry with them,
and the anger even progressed
a little toward hatred.
It was a real challenge for me to serve in that congregation,
attending meetings was difficult.
I would go with a heavy heart.
I put a lot of effort into making personal changes,
changing my attitude and getting rid of my negative traits.
I knew that if I did nothing,
it was going to affect the worship I give to Jehovah,
and also the relationship with my brothers.
My wife and I could end up completely losing our joy.
In order to make things right,
I prayed intensely to Jehovah.
I spent time in deep personal Bible study.
My wife would also find articles about maintaining peace
with the brothers,
and would give them to me to read.
She even selected kingdom songs
that dealt with maintaining peace,
and she would sing them to me.
I made a lot of changes to my attitude,
and worked hard to progress as a person
whom Jehovah would approve.
I tried to view my brothers
the same way Jehovah did,
and to serve him with joy.
I really wanted to give my best to Jehovah,
and to the brothers.
At the same time, I did not want those wrong thoughts
to ever come back into my heart.
The valuable lessons that I have learned
is that privileges are not more important.
Rather, it is serving Jehovah
that brings genuine happiness.
And now, I am finding real joy
and satisfaction in my service to Jehovah.
So may each of us
prayerfully work to have the attitude
of wanting to be a peacemaker.
And when we do this,
we prove to Jehovah
we're the kind of person
that he wants in his new world.
In Psalm 37-11,
it says of the new world,
the make will possess the earth,
and they will find their exquisite delight
in the abundance of peace.
So the new world will be a very peaceful place.
But if we're a peace promoter now,
we will convince Jehovah
that we will be an asset
toward that peace of his new world.
And think about this.
In the new world,
it will be natural
for perfect people to just display peace.
This beautiful aspect
of the fruitage of Jehovah's Holy Spirit.
But right now,
we have to work at it, don't we?
We have to seek peace, pursue it.
But if we're a peace pursuer now,
we will convince Jehovah
that we will be a peace displayer
in his righteous new world
and he'll want us to be there.
So let's diligently promote peace
and contribute toward the strength,
the happiness of Jehovah's beautiful organization
which really is a modern day miracle.
Remembering that those who promote peace
have joy and they impart joy to others.
And they make Jehovah's heart rejoice.
And all of that rejoicing
will last forever.
Thank you, Brother Let,
for helping us to see how we can contribute
to peace and joy among our Brotherhood.
We now come to the final talk of today's program.
Can we truly be joyful
in these difficult last days?
How can Jesus example help us to find joy?
Please give your full attention
to Brother Anthony Morris of the governing body
as he presents the talk,
close friendship with Jehovah
brings the greatest joy.
What do you look forward to?
As one of Jehovah's witnesses,
you look forward to perfection.
You look forward to eternal life
in a beautiful paradise earth.
However, with all of this wonderful future before us,
what about in the meantime?
We suffer from crime.
We suffer from natural disasters.
This pandemic we suffer from.
Sickness, poverty, war,
and other calamities.
In fact, as the Scriptures mention in Romans,
all creation keeps on groaning together.
So the question comes up,
and this is something we want you to reflect on.
It's a thought-provoking question.
Should the rest of our days
in this wicked system of things
be defined by grief?
No.
Absolutely not.
We don't want the remainder of our time
to be controlled by all the problems in the grief
that mankind is suffering.
Jehovah wants us,
even during these times,
to enjoy our lives
while we wait
for the fulfillment of his prophecies
and his promises to us.
Now, we're going to establish that for you,
scripturally,
even though hardship
defaults us before the Great Tribulation
and during the Great Tribulation.
Notice this scriptural counsel found in
the Bible book of Habakkuk.
Habakkuk chapter three,
and we're going to read
verses 17 and 18.
Although the fig tree may not blossom,
and there be no fruit on the vines,
although the olive crop may fail,
and the fields may produce no food,
although the flock may disappear from the pen,
and there may be no cattle in the stalls.
See, dire circumstances don't you agree?
But notice verse 18,
yet,
as for me,
I will exalt in Jehovah,
I will be joyful
in the God of my salvation.
See, even during these dire circumstances,
he was able to say,
with all of this going on,
asked for me,
I will exalt in Jehovah.
And I hope I can.
I will be joyful
in the God of my salvation.
So it's really his close friendship
with Jehovah God that enables him
to still have joy.
And that's the theme of this talk,
close friendship with Jehovah brings
the greatest joy.
So while we're waiting patiently,
Jehovah wants us to rejoice.
The world couldn't understand that reasoning,
but that's what Jehovah wants for his people.
It's just a wonderful promise
and for us to focus on.
Now, the Psalmist helps us to appreciate
that this isn't just some dream,
to have a close friendship
with the sovereign of the universe,
the Almighty God.
Now, notice here in Psalm 25,
so we'll read that together some,
25.
And this is a scriptural assurance.
Notice verse 14,
close friendship with Jehovah
belongs to those who fear him.
And he makes his covenant known to them.
That's beautiful.
Close friendship with Jehovah.
It's possible.
It's a reality.
He teaches us.
He teaches us dreaming when we speak
about having this close friendship
with Jehovah God.
It's a wonderful, wonderful reality
that we enjoy and it brings such joy
to have this closeness with Jehovah God.
Now, what helps with this
and be able to make sure we have this
close friendship,
it comes to acquiring the mental disposition
of Jesus.
No one's ever been closer to Jehovah
than Jesus,
pre-human existence
during his earthly ministry
and upon his resurrection.
So close to Jehovah.
So for us to really capture
how we can have a close friendship
with Jehovah,
we need to learn to think
and feel like Jesus did
and still does.
So when we imitate his example,
it increases our joy.
So in this talk,
we're going to discuss
two aspects of Jesus' mental disposition.
The first aspect
is how Jesus showed
on selfish love
and that drew him close to his father.
He found absolute joy
in showing neighbor love
and doing good to others.
Now, notice this artwork here, please.
Jesus gave from his heart,
unselfishly.
Imagine Jesus' feelings
when he met someone who needed help.
You see, Jesus and the joy
of helping others,
it's just very evident
and the closeness with his father,
they could see it,
the disciples rejoiced,
what a perfect example
of being close to Jehovah
and the result, joy.
So that's what we want to keep in mind
and Jesus said that example for us.
Now, by being generous,
Jesus taught us practice
what he did,
practice what he preached and taught.
Notice here in Luke,
chapter 6,
and we learned
because he lived this.
It's such freeness of speech
to make these things clear
to those that listened to him.
Luke, chapter 6,
and talk about being generous.
Jesus obviously was,
but notice, verse 38,
Luke, chapter 6,
practice giving,
and people will give to you.
They will pour into your laps
of fine measure,
down, shaken together,
and overflowing.
For with the measure that you are measuring out,
they will measure out to you
in return.
So beautiful lesson here,
be generous.
Jesus was so generous with his time
and all the things he did
with his disciples,
and the lesson being,
the measure you show
of being generous,
it comes in return.
So sometimes people in the world,
they have stated things,
I know I heard these things
when I first became
one of Jehovah's Witnesses,
you people,
you don't celebrate holidays,
you're stingy.
Nothing could be further
from the truth.
We don't celebrate holidays
that offend our God,
the one we love in worship.
So just because we don't
celebrate these holidays,
where there's gift-giving,
doesn't mean we're not generous.
We're happy to give gifts.
We enjoy giving,
because that's what Jehovah
wants us to do.
We look for opportunities
to be generous.
Now, along with
keeping your Bibles here at Luke chapter 6,
we need to be patient
with each other.
Some things we're going to discuss here.
I need to apply the counsel
and we're passing this on for
your benefit.
Some things to think about,
and if you see an area
where you need to
make improvement,
well, then by all means do so.
That'll keep you close to Jehovah
and having the abundant great joy
as a result of applying his counsel.
Now, verse 37,
right before verse 38,
notice,
moreover,
stop judging,
and you will by no means
be judged,
and stop condemning,
and you'll by no means
be condemned.
Keep on forgiving,
and you will be forgiven.
So,
very priceless counsel
and the need to be forgiving,
Jehovah and Jesus certainly are.
You'll also notice in verse 37,
stated, stop judging,
to stop it.
He didn't say,
don't judge.
He said, stop judging.
Why?
Because that's in perfect human inclination
to judge,
to judge others.
Sometimes, even in the congregation,
some can become overly critical.
They can become resentful,
envious,
and envy is so destructive.
Somebody might have materialistic prosperity.
They might enjoy privileges
that you don't have in the congregation.
Others might find them very endearing,
and envy can creep in.
And frankly,
it's unhealthy physically,
and spiritually.
And that's what I mean by that,
with this proverb,
fine proverbs,
if you would please,
and the inspired counsel is very,
very clear,
Proverbs 14,
and the 30th verse.
A calm heart gives life to the body,
even on notice,
but jealousy or envy,
these are things,
is rottenness to the bones.
They're rotten,
and the bone is so important,
all the bones in our body,
toward good physical health.
Same thing,
spiritually,
if we're jealous,
it's rotten to us,
in a spiritual way,
as well.
See, things that Jehovah
doesn't feel,
he would be one,
close friendship with somebody
that has this issue,
and doesn't work on it,
doesn't work to correct it.
So, when we work on,
thinking about some of these things,
we can actually personally
increase the joy
in our congregation.
And that takes us to another
scriptural thought
that we want to address here in this talk,
about having a close friendship
with Jehovah.
Notice 1st Peter,
chapter 4.
And you'll remember this verse,
listening 1st Peter,
chapter 4,
and verse 15.
1st Peter 4,
15.
However,
let none of you suffer
as a murderer,
or a thief,
or a wrongdoer,
no notice,
or a busy body,
in other people's matters.
So, obviously murder
and being a thief,
these are terrible sins
against Jehovah God.
But right after that,
he mentions a busy body.
Now, literally in the original language,
and this has always helped me
with his inspired thought,
a busy body,
literally overseer
in what is another's.
What does that tell you?
Well, if it's not your
responsibility to oversee
this particular issue,
then you could keep in mind
the need,
mine your own business.
The scriptures are against busy bodies.
They disturb the peace of congregations,
they interfere with the congregations,
enjoying the joy.
So, we refrain from imposing
our uninspired opinions on others,
or debating about matters
of personal choice.
You have some concerns,
talk to Jehovah God about it,
but if it's a personal concern,
don't be a busy body.
The scriptures are very clear,
stay away from that,
and developing this negative spirit
that could disrupt the peace of the congregation.
Now, as you watch the following video,
notice how our sister worked
at becoming more positive,
and by doing so,
she increased her joy.
I've had a lifelong struggle
with a negative attitude.
My negative disposition
made me a very impatient,
sarcastic, and demanding person.
One day, out in Phil's service,
I had insulted a partner of mine,
and the entire day was ruined.
My mother was in the car.
She was very upset with the situation.
She told me that I had a negative attitude,
and that I was not allowed inside the house
until that sister forgave me.
So, I asked the sister a lunch.
It was one of the most difficult
and uncomfortable situations I have been in.
I realized that I needed to make a self-examination.
Why was I negative?
Why was I so unhappy?
It was because I stopped pioneering,
and my friends continued
in their full-time service to Jehovah,
and that made me very frustrated.
To see them continue this while I was stuck.
But when I acknowledged that I had this negative attitude,
that prompted me to beg Jehovah
to help me to make changes.
The friends in the congregation
that I spent a lot of time with were not bad people.
Their imperfection fueled my negative attitude,
and I really had to put that fire out.
Personal studies was a major help
with my prayer to Jehovah to make these changes.
One of the things I meditated on
was how I just acted with his disciples.
When he was hungry and he was tired,
he was still very loving and kind.
So, I saw for myself,
when I was spiritually hungry,
how that affected my words and my actions towards the brothers and sisters.
The keys to maintaining Jesus' mental disposition,
our prayer, gratitude, and contentment.
My goal is to show a grateful attitude
for the blessings that I receive every day,
and also to look for the good in people,
to show them that I care and I love them,
and I've learned the more that I give
to the friends into my family,
the happier that makes Jehovah.
As Acts 2035, and Hebrews 1316 mentioned,
and when Jehovah is happy,
that really makes me happy.
Very thought-provoking video, don't you agree?
Now, you'll notice what lessons she'd learned
and we all benefit from it.
Prayer, gratitude, contentment.
Beautiful, that she could see that.
And when you have a prayer coupled with gratitude,
and then you show and display contentment,
you stay close to Jehovah,
and that brings great joy because we apply the counsel.
Now, the second that we're going to discuss in this talk
is using practical wisdom increases our joy.
So we made it clear that we want to show
on Selfish Love as Jesus did.
Now, we're talking about practical wisdom.
And how that increases our joy.
Jesus knew how important this counsel was.
He taught His disciples when it comes up to treasures.
You know, store up treasures in heaven.
See, because where your heart is,
and your treasure is, that's where your heart's going to be.
So he made that very clear,
trying to help them appreciate
a little practical, simple life.
Now, notice here in this artwork how Jesus is showing His disciples
and how much joy they have,
applying that counsel about keeping it simple.
Jesus knew that storing up treasures in heaven brings joy.
Imagine the joy Jesus found,
ensuring life's simple pleasures with others.
So they enjoyed their surroundings.
They were rejoicing.
Nobody is comparing who has certain amount of gold.
Now, this is just enjoying life
because of their close relationship with Jehovah God.
Now, by keeping our life simple,
we trust that Jehovah will provide for our needs
and something I've said for years.
Remember, Jehovah provides for our needs,
not our grids.
So if we're content with the needs Jehovah provides for us,
we can experience great joy.
We want to avoid distractions that could take us away
from wholeheartedly serving our Heavenly Father
or even start to distance us from Him.
The Bible is filled with practical wisdom
about physical health, finances, family life.
And when this counsel's applied it can,
in many cases, prevent problems,
at least minimize them even in these difficult last days.
And the Scriptures are very clear
that when we really peer into Jehovah's Word
and it's been referred to in the Bible book of James as a mirror,
here's the benefit.
Now, you'll remember this in James chapter 1
and how much we appreciate the wisdom that is found here
in James chapter 1 and verse 25.
James 1, 25.
But the one who peers into the perfect law
that belongs to freedom and continues in it
has become not a forgetful here,
but a doer of the Word.
And he will be happy in what he does.
So when we take the time to look
into Jehovah's Word, peer in,
it's not just a glance,
we're peering into the perfect law,
then we continue in it.
We don't read it and say,
oh, that was interesting,
and then go off and forget it.
No, a doer of the Word.
That means there's application of what we just read.
And the result, we will be happy.
Guaranteed.
That's what Jehovah promises.
So it has to be applied to have this benefit.
Now, there's a beautiful proverb.
And this gets personal for all of us too.
I need to apply it just like all of you are listening.
I need to do likewise.
Proverbs chapter 15.
And this can happen,
especially in these critical last days
that are continuing to get worse and worse,
but I've always loved this proverb,
and it's helped me for decades.
And I think many of you
agree that it's helped you,
and if not, then benefit
from the wisdom here of Proverbs 15.
And let's read verse 15.
All the days of the afflicted one are bad,
but the one with a cheerful heart
has a continual feast.
Now, we have to let that sink in all the days.
So this means day after day, this negative attitude,
poor me, poor me,
one affliction after the other,
like the sister in the video we saw earlier,
just absorbed with negative things.
But then it's contrasted with having a cheerful heart,
and it's like having a feast.
So mentally and emotionally,
we're going to benefit from not
needlessly focusing on the afflictions
and the things that we deal with.
It connects with the earlier we talked about prayer,
gratitude, and contentment.
So agonizing over problems
that are beyond our control
does not please God.
We do the best we can with our circumstances,
but to be daily afflicted and agonizing
over these things that really are no control over,
we do the best we can to resolve our problems,
but try to focus on the more productive things.
What can we do?
What are the positive things?
And this isn't just some psychological endeavor.
This is scriptural direction.
Scriptural advice.
And when applied, it really works.
See, Jehovah blesses our efforts.
And if you think about it, especially to some older noun,
I can relate to it.
Some of you older ones, just keep in mind,
just because you're tired doesn't mean
you don't love Jehovah that you're not close to him.
Things have changed.
So keep your close friendship with him
and don't dwell on the afflictions of being elderly,
not healthy, spiritually or physically.
Jehovah will help us to get through those times.
Now, what will help, too,
is to take the thinking down another path.
And there's a Psalm here that I'm going to share with you.
Psalm 77.
So if you'll find Psalm 77.
And this is more beautiful and spired advice.
Psalm 77.
And here in the 12th verse.
And I will meditate on all your activity.
And ponder over your dealings.
So again, another one of those verses
were to pause.
Think about it.
So you're talking about the times we're living in.
So we must meditate on Jehovah's activity.
We'll come back to that in a moment.
Ponder over your dealings.
What would that maybe mean?
Well, Jehovah, how does he deal with his servants?
How does he deal with us?
He's kind.
And don't you love being around somebody
that's reasonable and kind.
See?
And the way they deal with others, they're kind.
Well, when they're that way,
they're really imitating how close they are to Jehovah
because he's kind when he deals with us.
And we're so grateful for that.
And talking about meditating on the activity,
we'll think about the creation.
And what Jehovah's done with the creation.
People that accept evolution, they couldn't do such.
They couldn't find any benefit from,
because they don't believe in creation.
All of this just happened.
And not so for us.
When we look at the creation,
something is simple,
and this does make Jehovah happy when we do it.
A beautiful flower or a bouquet of flowers.
Sometimes the world, they start these businesses
and they have these fake flowers.
Some of them look pretty good,
but compared to a real flower,
I've seen some make these roses that look pretty good.
But I don't smell what I smell with the real rose.
The whole thing with a beautiful rose
it just makes you reflect on the creator.
And something that's always been a treasure for me is
when you can capture a beautiful sunset.
Might be a sunrise or might be a sunset,
but it just causes people to go wow.
And some of them stop and think about God,
whether they don't believe in Him or not.
It just stuns them.
And shortly after we had moved here to headquarters in Warwick,
I remember in just a few days after being here,
we had some rain and such,
but then they took a picture.
I've had a beautiful rainbow.
Then they took a picture of with my tablet.
How can you not feel good and refreshed
by looking at such activity of Jehovah God?
Beautiful, beautiful, rainbow.
And then there's the antics of animals.
I love dogs, I love puppies and kittens,
the things they do,
and sometimes they're able to capture them on video.
It just causes joy in the heart.
So find joy more in all of the creation of them,
but most of all, find joy in your relationship with Jehovah God.
Now with that in mind,
notice how our brother uses practical wisdom in the following video.
I had a stable job at a local resort,
but I later lost this job.
I tried to look for work,
but I was unsuccessful.
My savings ran out.
We had run out of money to buy a gas for cooking.
It felt like my world had ended.
I did some research in publications.
I found that I was able to follow the example of some brothers
who had found that they were able to start businesses
using these schemes and abilities that they had.
I was able to use a fishing net that I owned
by going down to the sea, to the river,
put the net out in the evening.
Early in the morning, I would go down and be able to find fish
and crabs on the net.
It was not easy.
I did not always get a good catch,
but by doing this,
eventually I was able to support my family during that time.
We had to cook outside on a fire.
I thought about how I could help my family to stay positive,
we would sit together,
and we would sink in the songs, play games together,
and I feel that Jehovah blessed the efforts that I made.
He brews 13 verse 5,
that scripture reassured me that,
as long as I didn't compromise the important aspects
of Jehovah's worship,
my family's needs were cared for.
I have always admired the beauty and power of the sea.
It reminds me that the one who created the sea,
it's not hard for him to care for,
just one small human like me.
Nice application of the council
to have practical wisdom and the benefits.
Now, I encourage you to keep in mind
what we've discussed here,
showing the neighbor love that Jesus showed
and the joy he experienced from that,
and then the practical wisdom that Jesus taught us about,
so that we stay close to Jehovah
and not get distracted with things
that the world's absorbed with.
Now, to help us completely capture
this mental inclination of Jesus,
especially in the days ahead,
I want you to find Romans,
or excuse me, Hebrews chapter 12,
and many know this verse.
They've benefited,
but it certainly applies to our discussion
about a close friendship with Jehovah
bringing great joy.
Hebrews chapter 12,
and you'll notice here,
verse 2,
as we look intently at the chief agent
and perfector of our faith, Jesus,
for the joy that was said before him,
he endured a torture stake,
despising shame,
and has sat down at the right hand
of the throne of God.
Beautiful council,
and this is what we need to do.
See, look intently at the chief agent, Christ Jesus.
Now, when you're looking at something intently,
that means you're looking away from everything else.
You're focused.
Look intently at these last days
at the chief agent, Jesus.
Now, what we learned,
because you think about what he went through,
the torture stake is mentioned here,
even that three and a half year ministry
with those hypocrites,
those religious hypocrites attacking him
with their lies and slander,
and then those final days
of his earthly life,
and especially those final hours,
and then those hours on the torture stake,
and he knew what was coming,
the details.
How does a man deal with that
without collapsing?
Well, we're not left to wonder
for the joy that was said before him,
hindered all that.
So Jesus had the prehuman existence,
the joy of sitting with his father again
in the heavens, oh, my,
it got him through it.
Same for us brothers,
the joy will get us through it.
The joy of staying close with our God,
and finally this last verse
for this closing talk here,
Romans chapter 12.
Two sentences from this 12th verse here,
Romans 12, 12,
and take this to heart.
Rejoice in the hope,
endure under tribulation.
So while waiting for the fulfillment
of all of Jehovah's promises,
and the things that we have to deal with,
remember how Jesus dealt with it,
just cling to Jehovah,
have that close relationship with him,
and you will experience the greatest joy.
Thank you, Brother Morris,
for explaining why we find joy
in walking closely with our Heavenly Father
as Jesus did.
We have seen today that our joy
does not depend on external circumstances.
Rather, it is a God-given quality,
and Jehovah has indeed given us
many reasons to rejoice.
What can we look forward to
on the next segment of the program?
Note that the scripture theme will be
boast about his holy name,
let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.
We boast about Jehovah's name
when we share in the ministry,
no matter what form that might take.
Throughout the next session,
we will focus on the joy of disciple-making,
and the program will help us
to become more effective disciple-makers.
Our closing song is number 28,
entitled Gaining Jehovah's Friendship.
After the song, you may have your own closing prayer.